Authors: Aaron Gerding;Evan Ray;Nicholas Reich

The COVID-19 pandemic has led to rapid methodological and practical innovation in the elicitation and evaluation of forecasts of infectious disease burdens, a primary goal being to help public health workers make informed decisions about how to manage these burdens in a transparent manner. An implicit expectation and motivation in these efforts has been that refined evaluation metrics and corresponding elicitation procedures will steer the epidemiological modeling and forecasting community toward practices which demonstrably yield added utility for society through the decisions they support. Explicit descriptions or quantifications of such utility are, however, elusive. And moreover there has only been limited discussion of how predominant evaluation metrics, such as quantile-based proper scoring rules for probabilistic incidence forecasts, might be indicative of the success policies tethered to those forecasts will have with the type of multivariate stochastic optimization tasks public health policy makers constantly confront during an infectious disease emergency.

Here we pursue one possible tether between multivariate forecasts and policy: the allocation of limited medical resources in response to COVID-19 hospitalizations in various regions so as to minimize expected unmet need. We formulate a standardized allocation algorithm following techniques developed in operations research to solve constrained newsvendor problems with multivariate demands. We then score forecasts according to how much unmet need their associated allocations would have allowed. This scheme is implemented with respect to a hypothetical limited resource for quantile forecasts of COVID-19 hospitalizations in the US at the state level recorded in the COVID-19 Forecast Hub. The forecast skill ranking given by this allocation scoring rule can vary significantly from the ranking given by the weighted interval score now used by the CDC, especially during surges in hospitalization such as in late 2021 as the Omicron wave began. We see this as strong evidence that the allocation scoring rule detects forecast value that is missed by traditional accuracy measures and that the general strategy of designing scoring rules directly linked to policy performance is a promising research direction for epidemic forecast evaluation, ranking, and combination.